Okay.
Have you had a chance to interview John Bertrand?
No. If we could ever get him here. He is now
president of, what is it? I can never remember the
name. The Barry. The Barry School. President of
the Barry School.
He could tell you a great deal because he was in the
formative period of the basic division. When I was
with them, of course, it was just the freshman
annex. But he was there when the division itself
was organized as a union. for administering the
work of all freshmen. When you say he was there in
the formative, this would be at the time it was
established at the end? Yes, and then he became its
dean. And he stayed with it then until it was
disbanded as a separate unit? Yes.
Here again, my memory may be tricking me a little
bit.
I'm not sure that he did not become president of the
Berry schools
before the Basic Division was disbanded. But I'm
sure you've got a record of that, and you can check
on that. I think I have some material on the Basic
Division. And I can tell you someone else who knows
a great deal about it is Cliff Randstuhl, who is
associate dean of the College of Engineering. He
and I and John were all associated with the
freshman annex in the basic division. Well, I
think it's commonly stated around here that one
reason for it was to help control the hazing. You
know, this is why the freshmen were chosen to go off
campus rather than, say, the seniors. But I
presume the freshman class was the largest, so it
also would be the best one to have separated that
you had to separate. Exactly.
You then... Oh, I do know. John Bertrand did leave
before the basic division was disbanded, and he
was followed by Dr. Kahn, who later became
president of Oklahoma State University. I think
he left us to become dean of the College of Arts and
Sciences there and then was later made president.
Oklahoma State. So you went from the head of the
basic division and also you were, I guess, as
assistant dean of the college, your
responsibility was being head of the basic
division. Is that? That's it, yeah. And then you
became the dean of arts and sciences for about
three years. From, yes. For four years. Longer
than that, yes. It was four years, I guess it was.
And then dean of the college for another... Three
or four years. Then went on leave with the
Commission on Higher Education as its first
program examiner. I was with them for 15 months and
then came back to the Department of English and
remained in it until I retired in 72.
Were there any significant occurrences while,
say, you were dean of arts and sciences, any
significant changes that were made in that
particular area that might bear mentioning? Did
you start any new programs or anything of that
nature?
Yes, although I doubt if I could claim much credit
for them. What had been a department in the College
of, I mean in the School of Agriculture,
called Agricultural Administration, became a
department in the College of Liberal Arts, the
Department of Business,
under Professor Leland, Professor Tom Leland.
And it was also at that time that the Department of
Oceanography was created and assigned to the
College of Arts and Sciences under its first head,
Dale Leper, Dr. Leper. Now, it was the Department
of Oceanography then, although one of its options
was meteorology and became, of course, later on, a
program on its own. And those two things were done.
I don't believe any other departments were
established then.
No, education and psychology was still there.
Of course, the makeup, and I'm sure old catalogs
would show you this, was entirely different from
what it is as a College of Liberal Arts. As a matter
of fact,
I have been spun off from the College of Liberal
Arts, the College of Science, the College of
Geosciences, the College of Business
Administration. And education. And the College
of Education. They've all spun off. Arts and
Sciences. From Arts and Sciences. So you, in a
sense, while you were dean of arts and sciences,
you had everything that wasn't even, that wasn't
either engineering or agriculture. I'll better
name that. Yes. Okay. Then you went up to the, I say
went up, I presume it was a promotion up to the dean
of the college, which was equivalent to current
vice president for academic affairs, which then
puts you what? uh one level below the president at
that time of course we also had a chancellor so the
the president was one level below the chancellor
and i was below the president kind of executive
deanship so the the the deans of this other schools
of the various schools reported through you to the
press to the president of texas that's right
I noted that you asked to be relieved of that
position and go back to full-time teaching. Was
that, had you had about all that you wanted of
administration? Just about. And you enjoyed the
teaching more than you did administration, I take
it? I also enjoyed my work with the commission. 15
months I was with them. Let's see, when you went
back to teaching of English, I take it you had not
been doing any teaching while you were in these
various administrative positions. I continued
to teach as long as I was at the annex, but after that
I did not teach any more. By the time you went back to
the department, you were then offering graduate
degrees, I believe, were you not? Or did masters
come in later than that? I think masters didn't
come in right away. Let's see. Although it was not
long before we began to offer a master's degree.
And then, of course, still later the doctorate.
And I am really very happy, in a small way, that I was
able to stay with the department long enough to see
two doctoral candidates through.
You chaired the committee for two doctoral
candidates. That's right. And I'm sure served on
other committees as well. Oh,
yeah. Back to this service on the Texas Commission
on Higher Education, you were their first program
examiner. Would you explain just exactly what
that means? The staff at that time consisted of
three people and some clerical help. There was the
director, who was Dr. Ralph Green, now with the
Federal Reserve Bank in Dallas. There was the
program examiner, and I will fill that position,
and there was a
finance examiner, who was Dr. Walker from the
University of Texas. And that was the staff. Of
course, I should say this. We were staff people
working for the members of the commission. And we
had to define our own job. We had to plan it. We had to
get the whole organization going. Because it was
brand new at that point. It was brand new, yes. And
we had to find out really what we were to do. Now, as
program examiner, it was my job to become familiar
with all the academic offerings and all of the
publicly supported institutions of higher
education, not including junior colleges, which
were at that time under the Texas Education Agency
but all the four-year institutions familiarize
myself with them and make recommendations to the
commission on whether some programs should be
deleted or whether programs should be added And we
also made recommendations, as the present
commission does, on petitions for new programs.
We made recommendations to members of the
commission. There was a great deal of talk at that
time throughout the state about proliferation
and institutions were proliferating programs
and costing the state an unholy amount of money.
And the commission was created, among other
things, to see if there was this proliferation. Of
course, the tremendous growth in students later
on made that purely academic, an academic
question, but it was not an academic question at
the time at all. And another thing, of course, was
to see if it was possible to make sense out of
appropriation.
instead of having every president go to the
legislature and get what he could on whatever
basis he could, this was an effort to do it
logically and according to some kind of formula so
that everybody would be treated the same way as
everybody else. And formulas are still in
existence. We've tried recently to change that
for him. Yeah. Not to go off the formula system, but
I think we tried for the library in view of the fact
that we have to serve as Ag's extension and
experiment station. We tried to get a different
formula for library support for A&M. In fact, we
may well have outgrown that conception of the
formula. But it made an awful lot of sense then.
I was lucky enough to sit in on many of the meetings,
even of the from the financial side because the
program was involved so much in the financing. Say
if a college or university in Texas at that point
wanted to start an entirely new program, say they
wanted to begin offering a degree in business
administration where they had not in the past, did
that proposal to create that new program come
through your office then? Yes. But by the same
token, if you saw the need for a new department
somewhere, you could recommend that, I take it.
Although, to my knowledge, that was never done.
Were there many programs? It could have been.
At first, the commission was, as you might expect,
very, very conservative. And it... It
scrutinized very carefully every request, even
for new courses, not new programs, not new degree
programs, but even new courses.
The commission, I thought, when I was with them,
was a very fine body and a dedicated group of
people. i think they did look upon themselves as
representing not parts of the state but the state
as a whole i don't know whether that remained true
of later commissions or not but it was true i think
of that first one has has the work the type of work
that you did for the commission has that been taken
over now by the coordinating board that's yeah the
coordinating board succeeded the commission on
higher education okay
uh
Well, I know what I'm going to ask. Were there many
programs that were proposed but subsequently
turned down while you were in the commissioner's
office? No, because there were not very many that
were proposed in the 15 months that I was there. I
think that the institutions probably were
deliberately holding back a little bit to see how
the commission would function and let it get on its
feet. I think some requests were made almost
immediately after I came back. Did you know when
you went to the commission as program examiner
that you would be there only one year? I had gone on
leave only for a year. I suspect I could have gotten
an extension. I think I would have been granted an
extension. And I almost asked for it, but then I did
want to get back to my teaching. It must have been
quite an honor for you to be the one person selected
from the whole state of Texas to occupy that
position. Well, I don't know how much of an honor it
was, but it was certainly a very enjoyable
experience and a very worthwhile one. But I mean,
they had to be somebody with some degree of
knowledge about college administration in that
position. Well, I certainly appreciated the fact
that Dr. Green, who was the director, did ask me to
come and serve his program exam. Well, as I said,
you were the one person from the whole state. Well,
he could have found others, I'm sure. But he did
come to you and asked you. Yes, he did. So then in 57,
and you returned in the fall of 57, I think, you
returned back to College Station and resumed your
teaching. Did you still have to do mostly freshman
English at that point? No. No, I did not at that
time. Although, and this may sound surprising, I
wanted to teach freshmen and almost always had at
least one section of freshmen. I had a belief then,
and I'm not sure that I've changed it since, that
senior members of the department ought to teach
freshmen. So I really asked for at least one
freshman section. Now that was not true later on as
we got much, much bigger.
I gradually dropped my freshman word, but that was
not for a number of years after I came back, well
into the 60s
when we were having graduate courses and so on. I'm
not so sure that I still don't think that senior
members of a department should teach freshmen.
Well, I think that's a fairly widely held opinion
in certain areas. I know that when I was at Ohio
State, every faculty member in the history
department had one section of freshman history
each year. So no matter how long you'd been at Ohio
State, you still taught freshman history one
semester. And I say that realizing that sometimes
a graduate assistant is a better teacher of
freshmen than maybe a senior member. But I think
it's for the good of the senior member as much as for
the good of freshmen. Well, I think at times,
however, a graduate assistant, maybe not quite so
much, but a brand new PhD, I think, has a tendency to
expect far too much from Freshmen, perhaps many of
them, have not had a very good background in high
school. That could be. We had some inkling of that
last year here when a young fellow had done a lot of
work up here for a paper he had to write. I think he
came back and told us that, I don't know, something
like 70% or 80% of the class had not passed the
course. And this was a new faculty member who,
unfortunately, was not going to be back the
following year. The student, at least, his
version of it was that the faculty member showed a
great lack of concern for the students under him.
But I think that this young PhD had expected a great
deal more than he should have from freshman. I
think I found myself in the same trap when I taught
high school history for one year. I expected more
of my students than I should have. And I've
observed that when my son has had new graduates as
teachers in the public schools that they
sometimes expect far more than they should. And
someone who's had some more experience knows more
of what to expect from a course. Plus, I think in
some respects, it's better for the freshman
student to have someone who's had a fair amount of
experience in teaching. Yes. And it is quite
possible that the fledgling instructor expects
more than he should. Well, his most recent
experience has been with his own graduate
studies, and if he had to read 150 pages a week and
write three term papers in the semester, why, then
he figured freshmen ought to be able to do that too.
Yeah. And I would think a graduate student at least
ought to be somewhat more mature and be able to
budget his time better than many freshmen are able
to do. So you continued to teach in the English
department until you retired then in 72. Was
most of that recent service under one department
head or was that under more than one? It was under
more than one. Dr.
Stuart Morgan for most of that time
He had replaced Dr. Mayo, who also had asked to be
relieved of administrative work. And Dr. Morgan
then was had for many years until his own
retirement to modified service. He was followed
by Dr. John Anderson, who subsequently went to the
University of Houston. He was followed by Dr. Lee
Martin, who died while here, and he was followed by
Dr. Hurth, the present here. And I was under Dr.
Hurth, Dr. Martin, and on through to Morgan.
Okay. A year ago you were chosen as the speaker for
A&M's first formal summer commencement, and I
believe I wrote you at that time and you didn't have
a copy of your speech. No, I didn't. I'm not going to
ask you for a copy now. But anyway, did you look upon
that as somewhat of an honor to have been chosen as
the first summer commencement speaker indeed yes
i would have considered it an honor to be asked to
speak to graduating students yes
there is one honor that i have been proud of i mean as
a teacher i was fortunate enough to be the
recipient of one of the faculty achievement
awards oh back in 1962
Six years after I came back into teaching. Well, I
think anybody would be justifiably proud to
receive one of those achievement awards and the
fact that they give out 12 in a year and what they're
now about. something over 1,000 members of the
faculty, I believe. I think you're right. So maybe
like one in 1,000 gets one now. That's a fairly
small percentage. Yeah, that's a small
percentage. I've been somewhat interested in the
last couple of years from which I've attended that
many of them are relatively new faculty members,
particularly who received the teaching awards.
Some of the research awards go on occasion to older
faculty members. I think that's really very
encouraging that the younger teachers are very
Well, I think some of our newer members, this will
sound kind of odd after what I just got through
saying about the young man in English faculty, but
I think some of our newer teachers have come along
at a point where technology has advanced so much
that they are more familiar with some of the
teaching aids than some of the older ones. Oh,
unquestionably, that enters into it. Therefore,
they can make a more interesting learning
experience for their students someone who has not
had the experience and does not have the
capabilities of working with the teaching aides
that are available.
Have you noticed in the many years you've been here
any degree of changes in the types or quality of
students which we have had.
I am told that statistics indicate very clearly
that on the average the preparation of our
students has been better than it was in earlier
year.
But of course
When I came, it was possible to know a major part of
all the students. I mean, for a faculty member to
know them. And I think when you get to know students
individually, you tend to rate them very highly
because they are not statistics to you. And so
while I'm quite sure the statistics are accurate,
that on the average, our entering students do have
better preparation than they once had. I think it
would be awfully hard to beat some of those earlier
students who of course went on and did make names
for themselves in all kinds of occupations.
I wonder whether maybe some of that is that perhaps
a larger percentage of our students are now coming
from larger cities where the public high school
education is perhaps a little bit more advanced
than it is in some of the rural areas from which we
got most of our students a few decades ago.
Of course, we also have a better retention rate
now, do we not, than we did? I haven't really seen
any statistics. I've had people tell me that they
think that we retain more than we used to. And how
much of that is because of academic, and I've had
some indication that some of the people left
because of the military aspect. Well, that was
true. And with the lessening of that, I would
think, that factor would decline in importance.
But... I guess there's no question, what if the
students are better prepared when they come?
They're better able to cope with the increased
difficulty of the learning process. And
you were asking me at the beginning of our talk,
what could you do in the bachelor club? Well,
there's more for students to do now, huh?
Undoubtedly, there is. There used to be a general
exodus Friday afternoon. Students
would go as far away as Dallas or Fort Worth or San
Antonio. And while there may still be an exodus, I
don't know. I suspect that there is so much more for
students to do here that there's not the felt need
to go.
We had one commandant, a very salty commandant,
who made a remark I'll never forget. He said, if we
had a one-way court trip to hell, there would be
some students who wanted to leave a day early.
And that was pretty true. You know, for a long time
we had a six-day week. His classes were held
Saturday. It was not until I was in administrative
work that we reserved Saturday for the military
part of the program and went to a five-day college
week.
I believe, let's see, in, what, 62, when there was
the previous self-study, you were in charge of
that. Only as the editor. Editor of the final
report. Yes. But I believe someone told me that
your review at that point, at least the published
review, was not quite as elaborate as the one...
No. Nothing like. In fact, I was amazed at how much
more complex this... years' self-study, or
rather, I mean, this time's self-study was than
the one that we did. That was our first experience,
and I think everybody in the institution was
groping his way at that time, and we weren't quite
sure, but it was nothing like the elaborate
document. You say that was the first time. Was A&M
not accredited by the Southern Association? I
don't think they had ever... No, I could be wrong. I
could have been conscious of it before. But that's
the first one I can remember. A full-scale one.
Well, it seems strange. You've been a member of the
Southern Association of Colleges and Schools for
a long, long time. And maybe they had earlier ones
that I just didn't know about, but I don't think so.
I think that was the first one. Well, certainly you
were in an administrative position in the Dean of
Arts and Sciences at the time. The logical
previous one would have been. Well, it would have
been. You would have been involved. No, this is a
much more elaborate. I know. I've got 16 feet of a
table.